Homelessness in San Francisco is steadily on the rise. The city reports that in 2019, the number of unhoused individuals was 30% greater than in 2017 (sfgov.org). This an issue which reveals the inadequacy of affordable housing and accessible mental health care in the City. There are many organizations and city institutions developed to support the homeless population of the city, but this information is not always easily accessible. We seek to create a web map which will illuminate the rapid growth of the city’s homeless population, as well as provide information on the most immediately accessible resources for both social workers and unhoused individuals. The audience of this project includes citizens of San Francisco, social workers who work with the homeless population, and the homeless population themselves. Citizens of San Francisco deserve easy access to information about the homeless population, as it is an issue of immediate concern to many. Social workers should have a way to easily access information about homeless services, especially if they are interacting with individuals on the street and need to know the closest place to direct them for assistance. Finally, this project could be used by the population of homeless individuals who have access to a mobile device or a device with internet access to direct them to the nearest place of service. This map will also illuminate possible service deserts, or places where there is no easily accessible service. This may inform the decision of cities or other organizations when considering where a good location for a shelter or other service may be.


311 San Francisco calls and mobile app reports of Encampments from August 2019 - February 2020 will be used to represent the homeless population. If possible, we would like to use more than 6 months worth of data, but are unsure if there is a way to upload a dataset that large as a tileset in Mapbox Studio. (https://sf.connect.socrata.com/#!/dashboard?places=&categories=204:T%7C210:T%7C285:1-29%7C292:T%7C293:T%7C299:T%7C300:T&start_date=2018-12-23&end_date=2019-02-21&lat=37.7474&lng=-122.43920000000003&zoom=12&shapeIds=&shapeGroupId=vtsz-7cme&mapType=Map&listViewTab=overview&overlayLayers=Neighborhoods&search_field=&search_value=&autoUpdate=false&heatFilters=&statusFilter=&choroplethField=count&searchType=)
A list of homeless services compiled by us, found with Google Maps and homelessshelterdirectory.org (https://www.homelessshelterdirectory.org/cgi-bin/id/city.cgi?city=san%20francisco&state=CA) will also be used.


The first dataset allows us to get an idea of the population of unhoused individuals in San Francisco and how much that population has changed over a short period of time. It also shows where the population is distributed throughout the city, which illuminates areas to focus on and ones that have adequate support. This dataset is not a perfect representation however, as there is no indication of how big each encampment is or how many people were living there.
The second dataset allows the map to be used as a tool rather than just an informational tool. By incorporating data regarding the location of services relative to the homeless population, individuals seeking service can be directed to the closest location that will support their needs. This dataset is sorted by type of service so the differences in what is offered at each location will be clear by viewing the map.

A dataset that contains the actual number of homeless individuals and where they were counted would be very helpful, but we could not find this dataset in our searching. The current dataset used to represent the homeless population is solely based upon calls or mobile app reports to the city of encampments. However, the same individual or group could be reported multiple times for an encampment, which means the number of reports on the map is not equal to the number of unhoused people in the city. However, it is a good indication of the number. If the number of encampment reports increases, we can logically assume that the homeless population is increasing as well.
Detailed description of your methodology:

The raw data from 311, when downloaded, is extremely cluttered and contains much unneeded information. The data, in csv format, was cleaned by deleting unnecessary columns, and was then uploaded to Mapbox Studio to be converted into a tileset for easier manipulation. If necessary, this data may need to be transformed into a different format to allow for an upload of a larger timescale to Mapbox Studio.
The data for homeless services was compiled by us and placed into a .csv, which will be uploaded to Mapbox. This .csv contains the coordinates of each location, the name, type of service, and other pertinent information about the service that will be accessible via a pop-up on our map.

From afar, the 311 dataset will be displayed as either a heatmap or point cluster. When zooming in, the points will separate to their respective locations the closer the user gets. This allows the user to see where the homeless population in the city is most concentrated, and also areas where the city may need to focus more efforts. The points will be clickable, and will contain information about each incident when applicable. The data will need to be converted to a .geojson for this to work, however, and that may increase the size of the dataset to a point where it is no longer able to be handled by Mapbox Studio. We also will build a timescale for this map that allows the user to see how the data differs during set intervals of time (per week?).
The second dataset of shelters will be displayed as points with different colors/icons depending on the type of service offered. When clicked, they will open a popup listing the name, mission of the organization, and a link to their website. Along with this will be a legend that must be built to say which icon corresponds to what service, and the functionality to filter out services by their type.
